
Hello, and welcome back to our course, a System View of Communications
from Signals to Packets.
Right now, we're in Part 3.
I'd like to start out by reviewing what this course is about in general,
and then focusing in on what this particular part is
going to be discussing in detail.
In general, this course is discussing the question of how
we transmit information wirelessly.
For example, we might have a person-- let's
say the person on the right-hand side, he
wants to send a text message to the person over here on the left-hand side.
The two people might be located a far distance apart,
perhaps in two different cities, or perhaps
even in two different countries.
How does that information from the person on the right-hand side
get to the person on the left-hand side?
In order to address this question we've broken up all of this communication
into three steps. In the first part of the course,
we talked about the first part, which is the link from the phone to a base
station.
The base station is the place where the phone communicates locally.
And we talked about what it takes to communicate from one point
to another point.
In Part 2, what we talked about is how we can have multiple users sharing
access to the same base station or access point using a technique
called frequency division multiplexing.
Now in this part, Part 3, what we'll be talking about
is this. Assume that the person on the right-hand side
has been able to make a connection successfully to the base station.
Now, in order for him to complete the communication,
the text message at the base station on the right-hand side
has to make its way all the way over to the base station on the left-hand side
through a set of links between pairs of base stations.
Now, critical to this is that the two base stations are not
connected directly to each other,
but they're connected over a network.
So very specifically then, this part of the course
is going to be talking about networks.
In general, a network allows us to connect many users together.
In this picture here, what we can see is a connection
between a set of 11 base stations.
The network itself consists of many links between those base stations.
Each base station we will call a point or a node within the network.
Now, if I have a network consisting of n users or n base stations-- in this case
here, n is equal to 11-- then the number of possible connections
between pairs of base stations is n times n minus 1 divided by 2.
That's because every base station can make a connection to every other base
station.
Right?
So that's n minus 1 connections.
And since there's n base stations, it's n times n minus 1.
And because I'm double counting connections
from one base station to the other one and back again, I have to divide by 2.
So in this particular case, if I have n is equal to 11 base stations,
then the total number of possible connections
is 55-- 10 times 11 divided by 2.
What we can see here though is that the number
of connections I've sketched out over here
is actually much smaller than that.
In this case, it's about 17.
The reason for that is because if I make every connection,
that doesn't scale well because, for example, two base stations could
be located a very, very far distance apart from each other.
And making that direct connection could require a very, very long cable.
The other problem with that is that the number of connections
is going to scale approximately as the square of the number of nodes
in the network.
So for example, if I went up to 100 nodes in the network,
I would have about on the order of 5,000 connections, which is quite a few.
And this would be very, very bad if I had billions of users
that I needed to connect.
And so, in particular then, this part of the course
is going to be talking about how can we communicate over a network
where not every point is connected to every other point.
And so how can we pass messages from one point to another
and make sure that they get to their correct destinations?
And how can we ensure that that works even if the individual links might
be unreliable?
And finally, on this network-- of course,
the reason we all connect to networks like the Internet
is so we can run our applications--
how do we run our applications upon or on top of this infrastructure?
