
In this part of the course, we'll be centering our discussion
around a particular example of a network that's the most popular network now,
known as the Internet.
In this video, what I'd like to do is talk about
what are the components of the Internet and a little bit
about how the Internet is organized.
The Internet is actually not one network,
but it's actually a network of networks.
So here in this diagram what you can see is
that within each square or dotted square, that I have here,
we have one network.
So for example, at my home I might have a small network there consisting
of a few computers and maybe a server containing my media, music,
and video files or something like that, so I
can access them anywhere from my house.
But, of course, there are other networks.
For example, at my institution or my university
I might have a larger network that consists
of many, many computers and more servers,
for example, email servers, web servers, and things like that.
I can also have mobile networks for when I'm on the road.
So for example, if I'm accessing the network from my cell phone,
I might go through a base station.
And those base stations might be connected themselves through a network.
So I have multiple networks,
and actually all of these networks communicate with each other.
So for example, when I'm on the road, and I'm on the mobile network,
I can actually check my email, which might
be residing on a server within my institutional network.
And so in order for me to make that connection between different networks,
we have more networks over here known as Internet Service Providers,
or ISPs, which connect those networks together.
Each network consists of a set of nodes.
Some of those nodes might be routers.
Those routers are these circular symbols that are shown here.
These routers forward data along multiple paths.
So you can see here, let's say, this router here
has multiple paths for data coming in here.
That data might go out along multiple paths from that router.
The router needs to decide, for any particular piece of data,
where to forward that (piece of) data to.
Those routers are really what make the connections between two different end
systems or hosts.
So for example, if I wanted to access my email, which might be residing over
here, from my mobile phone, then I have to go
through a set of links that consist of routers.
My mobile phone here and my server here
are what are known as hosts or end systems.
They are the things that are running the actual applications,
for example my email client or my email server that I can use in order
to send messages and things like that.
Individually, each of these nodes, whether they be, let's say
an end system or a router, are connected by point-to-point communication links.
And those links can take many, many different forms.
They might go over fiber optic cables.
They might go over copper wire.
They might travel wirelessly or even through satellites.
So you can see now, through the Internet there's a wide diversity of things
that are interconnected to each other.
And they're connected through a wide variety of different possible links
between nodes.
Roughly speaking, the Internet has a hierarchical kind of structure.
At the center of that hierarchy, or the top level of that hierarchy,
are what are called tier-1 ISPs.
These tier-1 ISPs, or Internet service providers,
provide coverage over wide ranges, for example global or national coverage.
Examples of these might be large companies like Verizon or China
Telecom.
These tier-1 ISPs treat each other as equals.
They connect among each other to provide access between customers
of different tier-1 ISPs.
These tier-1 ISPs are at the top level of the hierarchy.
But it's not a strict hierarchy because there's not
only one tier-1 ISP, but actually several tier-1
ISPs that are all connected in parallel or privately with each other.
At the next lower level of the hierarchy are what are called tier-2 ISPs.
Tier-2 ISPs provide coverage over smaller, regional areas.
They're actually customers of the tier-1 ISPs,
so they get connectivity to the Internet through a tier-1 ISP.
But there's no strict hierarchy here either.
For example, you might have a tier-2 ISP connecting to this tier-1 ISP,
as well as this tier-1 ISP in order to provide better access, let's say,
to different destinations.
You might also have tier-2 ISPs connecting privately
among each other, so connections occur within one level of that hierarchy.
And so you can see, again, that it's not a strict hierarchy.
Finally, at the lowest level, we have what are called tier-3 and local ISPs.
These ISPs provide what's called the last-hop connection.
These provide the connection finally to your mobile tablets
or your mobile phone or your laptop computer or your server.
So these tier-3 or local ISPs are the closest ones
to the hosts or the end systems.
They are customers of the higher tier ISPs.
What you can see here is that you might have two different users that
are connected to two different local ISPs,
for example one user up here on the upper left-hand side
and another one there on the lower right-hand side.
And so these two PCs, let's say, might want to talk to each other using Skype.
And in order to establish a connection from one PC
to the other one, what you can see is that the data
from one PC to the other one must flow through a variety
of different networks.
