

So how well does Aloha utilize the channel that's available to it?
Well, let's study this by examining the efficiency of a particular variant
of Aloha, which we call slotted Aloha.
In slotted Aloha, what we do is we take a time interval,
and we divide it into a number of equal length slots
where the length of the slot is equal to the amount of time
it takes to transmit one packet.
For example, here I've taken a time interval and divided it into 25 slots.
We further make the assumption that each packet can only be transmitted
starting at the start of each slot.
So what that means, then, is that each packet occupies one slot only,
and it doesn't leak over into another slot.
What I show you here are different slots and different nodes
transmitting packets where the different nodes are shown in different colors.
Now, what you can see here is in the first slot, only
one node transmits, and so that packet will go through.
But in the second slot here, we have two nodes transmitting at the same time,
and so there's a collision.
So whenever there's a collision, as we can see in the case here, what happens
is that both packets are lost.
So that's a wasted slot.
That's not the only reason slots can be wasted, because there can also
be spots where the channel is idle where nobody's transmitting, as shown here.
So if we want to know, then, what the utilization of the channel is,
we use a measure, which is called the efficiency.
What the efficiency measures is the fraction
of slots that have a successful transmission.
So for example, in the case here, we had 25 slots in total shown.
And if we look at the number of successful transmissions,
that's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
So the efficiency, then, is 13/25.

There's a very closely related term, which is known as throughput.
That's the number of successful packets that are
transmitted in a unit time interval.
That's related to the efficiency, but it also depends on the slot length.
So for example, if the time interval shown here was one second, then
I would have 13 packets per second.
But if it was one minute, then I would have 13 packets per minute.
So in terms of packets, the throughput is lower
even though the efficiency is the same.
In order to analyze the efficiency of slotted Aloha mathematically,
we'll make certain assumptions.
The first assumption we'll make is that the nodes operate independently.
In other words, there's no interaction between them,
and the nodes don't really know what the other nodes are intending on doing.
They only know when a collision occurs.
We'll also assume that each node has a queue to hold packets for transmission.
So a queue is just a waiting area, and it
may hold several packets that are all waiting to be sent.
And if the node has a queue which is non-empty, then we refer to that node
as being backlogged.
If the queue is empty, then the node is essentially silent.
It's not really participating in the channel at all.
And so we're really only interested in what's
happening with the backlogged nodes, and in that case, what
we're going to assume is that the backlogged nodes send packets
in a time slot with probability, p.
So they have a packet to send, and intuitively,
what they do is they flip a coin.
And that coin has a probability, p, of coming up heads.
And if the coin comes up heads, then they put the packet into the slot.
And so the waiting time that they have-- this random waiting time — is essentially
the amount of coin flips, or slots, they have to wait until they flip heads.
Finally, we're going to assume that there are N nodes that
are backlogged, where N can vary.
And so now with these assumptions, we can derive an expression
for the efficiency of slotted Aloha.
That expression is shown down here as the term E.
And so remember the efficiency is the fraction of successful transmissions
or the probability of a successful transmission.
So when does a successful transmission occur?
Well, it occurs if a node transmits.
So the probability that a node transmits is p,
but at the same time, no other node can transmit.
So the probability that another node does not transmit is 1 minus p,
and since there are N minus 1 other nodes,
we take that 1 minus p and raise it to the N minus 1 power
to get the probability that no other nodes transmit.
And so this term p times 1 minus p to the N minus 1
is the probability that a particular node can transmit without a collision.
But since there are N nodes that might transmit,
we multiply that by N to get the final expression for the efficiency.
Now, the efficiency here depends on p and N.
And I show you a plot of the efficiency on the right-hand side
where I have the plot as a function of p.
And so what we can see then is, for a particular value of N,
the number of backlogged nodes, the efficiency
reaches a peak somewhere for p between 0 and 1.
W  hen p is equal to 0, the efficiency
is 0 because no nodes are transmitting.
All nodes are transmitting with probability 0.
And at 1, we have 0 efficiency because all nodes, or all backlogged nodes,
are transmitting with probability 1.
And so they are always colliding with each other.
So the maximum efficiency is going to be occurring somewhere in between 0 and 1.
We can actually derive an expression for the location of that maximum
by taking the expression that we derived for the efficiency
and differentiating it with respect to p and setting the result equal to 0.
So if I take this expression here, and I differentiate with respect to p,
I use the product rule because I have one term in p and 1 minus p.
So if I differentiate with respect to p of p,
then I just get N times 1 minus p.
And if I differentiate this term with respect to p,
then I just get N times p times N minus 1 times 1 minus p to the N minus 2.
Now, I can set this result equal to 0 to find the location of the maximum.
I'm going to divide through by N. That will cancel out.
And I'm going to divide through by all of the 1 minus p's.
I'm going to have N minus 2 of them, and that's going to leave one of them
behind.
So I get one 1 minus p left over here.
And then I get N minus 1 times p over here.
If I look at this, I have a minus p that cancels with a minus minus p.
So what I get then, in the end, is 1 minus N times p.
And that's equal to 0 when p is equal to 1/N.
So what that means, then, is that, in order
to achieve maximum efficiency if I have N nodes,
each node must transmit within a slot with probability 1/N.
So that's intuitively appealing.
For example, if I have 3 nodes, then each node
should transmit with probability 1/3.
So if I look at the plot over there, and I look at the blue curve
for N is equal to 3, I can see that the maximum there occurs at p
is equal to 1/3.
For N is equal to 5, I have the maximum at 1/5, or 0.2.
For N is equal to 10, I the maximum at 1/10, or 0.1, and so on.
What we can also see from those curves is that the maximum efficiency
decreases with the number of nodes.
That intuitively makes sense because the more nodes that
are trying to use the channel, we should be having more collisions,
and so there's going to be some loss of efficiency there.
But it seems like it's not going to 0, but plateauing
at some value somewhere around 0.37.
And so we can find that limiting value by looking
at the value of the maximum for each value of N.
So if we know the maximum for each value of N occurs when p is equal to 1/N,
then we can take this value of p and substitute it back into the efficiency
equation that we see over here.
And so I'll get N times 1/N, so that will give me 1.
Those will cancel.
And I'll get 1 minus 1/N to the N minus 1 as shown over here.
So that's the value of the maximum, the maximum efficiency,
for each value of N. And if I let N,
in that term, go to infinity,
then what will happen is I'll get e to the minus 1.
And so e to the minus 1 is about 0.37, or 37%.
And so what that tells us is that the efficiency of slotted Aloha
Is, maybe surprisingly, low.
It's only about 1/3.
So that means that the channel is really only being effectively utilized
1/3 or a little bit more than 1/3 of the time.
So that might seem low to you, but we have to trade that off against the fact
that we have a very, very scalable protocol.
We can add nodes, subtract nodes, because all the nodes are essentially
operating independently in this case.
It's also very simple.
If we look at the protocol, each node just flips a coin
and determines whether or not it's going to transmit in that particular time
frame.
So we have the advantages of simplicity and scalability trading off
against what might be considered intuitively
to be a relatively low channel efficiency.

There's one more issue that we need to look at in the protocol,
and that is how do we set this value of p.
So in order to achieve maximum efficiency,
each node must set its value of p, the probability of transmitting
in a particular time slot, to be 1/N, where N is the number of backlogged nodes.
But how does it know the number of backlogged nodes?
One possibility might be there would be somebody counting the number of backlogged
nodes, but that would imply some kind of centralized controller
running this thing.
So we don't want to have that.
So we want to have each node then trying to figure out
how to set its own value of p independently of all the other ones
to maintain that scalability.
There's a very intuitively appealing way to do that.
Each node could actually maintain its own individual value of p.
So now rather than having all nodes having the same value of p,
they all have their own individual value of p.
And they're going to adjust that value of p
up and down depending on how many collisions they encounter.
And so the idea, then, is that if it's encountering many collisions,
then it's probably trying to put for many packets onto the channel.
And so it should perhaps lower its value of p.
On the other hand, if it keeps on transmitting packets successfully,
then maybe what it should do is increase the value of p
because there are fewer number of nodes that
are trying to transmit at that time.
And so one particular strategy for doing this
is called binary exponential backoff.
So each node would execute this algorithm independently.
So they would come up with some initial guess
of p based on some idea of how many nodes are typically in the system.
So, for example, if typically 12 nodes are in the system,
it would start out with p is equal to 1/12.
And then if it didn't have any packets to transmit, it just
wouldn't change that value of p.
But if it did have a packet to transmit and it turned out
that it ran into a collision, then what it would do
is it would try to reduce its value of p, perhaps by dividing by 2.
So that's why we call it binary exponential
because we're dividing by 2.
And then every time it gets a collision, it will keep on dividing by 2.
And so we'll get this exponential decrease
if it keeps on running into collisions.
So we get, for example, 1/12, them 1/24, then 1/48, and so on.
We set this value here p_min, which will be a lower bound on the value of p.
So that avoids the problem where p gets too low.
Because if p gets too low, then essentially what will happen
is that the node will never retransmit, and it will never
know that it's actually ok to retransmit.
And it could end up being shut out from the transmission
or the use of that channel altogether.
On the other hand, if it transmits the packet and everything is fine,
then what it will do is increase its value of p.
So it might double its value of the p.
In this case, that would also lead to an exponential increase.
And we're going to set a maximum value, p_max, which
is going to limit the maximum probability the node can transmit at.
And so these updates, then, assure that the value of p chosen by the node
will lie somewhere between p_min and p_max.
And that avoids the situation which could
occur where one node starts to think that it has a lot of space,
and so it starts transmitting a lot.
Then, the other node tries to sneak in, but it
keeps on getting hammered by the node that has been transmitting a lot.
And so its value of p would go to 0 whereas the other 231 00:13:54,620 --> 00:13:56,400 node's probability, p, would go to 1.
And that wouldn't be very fair.
And so this setting of the limits p_min and p_max tries avoid that situation.
