

Let's take a look at a concrete example of how addressing is done,
by looking at IP addressing.
So remember, in general, the problem of addressing
is that we have a network, the network consists of many entities
hosts and routers and what we want to be able to do
is know, for a particular packet, where it's going,
and also perhaps where it is.
And so in order to do that, we give every node
an address, where I've, for simplicity, used letters here for the addresses.
But let's look at how addresses actually look like in the internet protocol.
So an IP address is a unique global address for a network interface.
And so, many of us have looked at that when
we've been playing with our computers and the networking there,
and we know that our computers all have an IP address.
Actually, more precisely, a network interface
has an IP address, where a network interface
is a connection between a host or router and a particular physical link.
And so actually, your computer, which is an example of a host,
may have actually more than one IP address,
because it typically has two types of links.
One would be a wired link, the other one might be a wireless link.
Routers, on the other hand, typically have many interfaces,
because what they want to do is take a packet in along one port,
and then send it in many possible different directions.
And so each one of those ports would have its own IP address.
And so I show you an example of a network on the right hand side
there, where we can see that the router there in the center
has three connections that it's making.
And so each of those interfaces then has its own IP address.
Each of the hosts here, I've assumed that there's just
a wired connection between them, and so they all have just one IP address
corresponding to that one single connection.
What you can see about the IP address is it
has this stereotypical form, where there are four digits separated by periods.
What does that mean?
It turns out that the IP address is actually encoding a 32-bit number.
So if I look at, for example, a particular example here corresponding
to that one computer on the upper left hand corner,
you can see those four numbers, each of them lies between 0 and 255.
So each of them, then, encodes by itself a single 8-bit number.
So here, for example, the first number, 223,
has a binary coding that looks like this.
So each of those four numbers, then, encodes a binary number,
and when I put those 4 8-bit binary numbers together,
I get a 32-bit number.
And so that's what the IP address is, in particular under IPV4.
And typically we split the number into two parts--
the most significant bits in the front here are called the subnet part,
and the least significant bits are called the host part.
A subnet has both a logical and a physical definition.
Logically, a subnet consists of a set of device interfaces
that all share the same subnet address.
So if this is the subnet part consisting of 24 bits,
that corresponds to the first three decimal numbers.
So if I look on the right hand side in that network diagram there,
we can see that in the upper left hand corner there,
there's an area delimited by green.
And all of those device interfaces there are all have
the same first three numbers, 223.1.1.
And so, logically, they're all on the same subnet,
because those first 24 bits of all those addresses are the same.
Physically, we often refer to a subnet as being
a set of devices that are connected to each other
without an intervening router.
So you can see, connected to that one router there,
there are three different subnets in this diagram.
Now, what you can see is that the subnet address,
or the length of the subnet address, determines
how many hosts can sit on that subnet.
So for example, if I have 24 bits in the subnet here, then
that means that I have 8 bits left over to specify different hosts.
And so that means I can have around 254 different hosts on that subnet.
So even though the 8 bits there typically encode 256 different numbers
from 0 to 255, the two endpoints, all 0s and all 1s, are usually reserved.
So all 0s is usually reserved to refer to the subnet as a whole,
and all 1s is typically reserved for broadcast packages that
should be received by all of the members of the subnet there.
We might have different desired sizes for different subnets.
In order to accommodate that, we've developed something called
Classless InterDomain Routing, or CIDR.
This allows the subnet portion of an address to have an arbitrary length.
And so when we specify these, we have an address format that
looks similar to what we had before.
We have four decimal numbers here, each encoding an 8-bit number.
I'll call those a, b, c, and d. Then we
add an additional number x, where x is the length
of the subnet portion in bits.
So I show you two different subnet addresses as shown over here.
One of them here has a 20-bit subnet portion,
the other one here has a 23-bit subnet portion.
But what you can see here is that the first
four numbers, are exactly the same here.
Now because the subnet portion here is 20 bits,
that means the subnet is specified by these first 20 bits over here,
and then the host portion has 12 bits to play with.
Whereas over here, when the subnet address is 23 bits long,
then the host portion only has 9.
So you can see that, obviously, there's about 8 times as many hosts that
can be accommodated in this subnet, compared with this one over here.
So finally, the question might be, well, how
do we actually get IP addresses for our devices or hosts?
And so, there are several different ways, or several different stages,
this occurs at.
If I'm talking about an individual host, or an individual device,
typically that host obtains an address from a network
that it's connected to via a process that is called Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol, or DHCP.
This allows IP addresses to be allocated dynamically, or on the fly.
In the early days of the internet, IP addresses were allocated manually.
But this was somewhat inflexible, because if that particular user who
had been allocated that IP address was not on the network,
nobody else could use that, because he might be there.
And so, by developing DHCP, what's happened
is that we can actually give a particular host
a lease for a particular IP address for a certain amount of time.
And then after that time has expired, another person
might be able to use that, or another host
might be able to use that IP address.
So it allows for more dynamic allocation of IP addresses.
And of course this is important as the devices
that we're using to connect to the internet become more mobile.
For a particular network, where does it get the IP addresses
that it can give out to hosts using DHCP?
Well, it turns out that networks are allocated portions of an internet
service provider's address space.
So an internet service provider is a larger organization,
and it has a subnet address that perhaps might look something like this.
So we have four decimal numbers there, but then this subnet address
is the first 20 bits as shown over here.
And so the host part, then, has 12 bits.
And that allows enough room for around 4,000 hosts.
Now, it can then take that room for 4,000 hosts
and give it out to smaller networks, maybe eight different networks,
as shown over here.
And each of those networks might divide that space of 4,000 hosts equally.
So that each of them would get about 500 hosts.
The way that it does that, is each of the networks
here would have its own subnet address.
The subnet address is longer.
So now instead of being 20 bits long, it's 23 bits long,
but all of the networks under this ISP have the same first 20 bits of those 23
bits.
That indicates that they're all under this ISP's space.
But the last three bits are different.
And so three bits, then, give us enough room for eight different networks,
because 2 to the 3 is 8.
The last question you might ask is, well,
the ISP has to get its allocation from somewhere,
and where does that come from?
And it turns out that those are centrally
allocated through an organization called ICANN, or the Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers.
