

Let's talk about the network layer.
We've divided our discussion of networking
up into five different layers, from application to physical,
and the network layer lies here in the middle between the transport
and the link layer.
To understand what the network layer does, let's
go back to our idea of sending a text message from one user
to another user's cellphone.
The two users might be located quite a distance apart,
so they're not talking to the same base station.
So when one user creates a text message and sends it,
it will go through the link layer in order to get to the base station.
But because the two are not at the same base station,
it has to get from the sender's base station to the receiver's base station
where it can be sent again over the link layer to the receiver's phone.
Now, it's the job of the network layer to ensure
that that package, or text message, gets from the source base station
to the destination base station.
And the key difficulty here is that there's no direct connection
from the source to the receiver.
They're connected by a network where it might take several steps
to go from the source to the receiver.
And so the other thing that you notice here
is that not only it might take several steps,
but there also might be many different paths that the text message can take.
And so the idea of the network layer is to make sure
that the best path, in some sense, is found.
Probably the most common example of the network layer
is called the IP or Internet Protocol.
In order to deliver packets over a network,
the network layer must perform several different functions.
We'll talk about four of them-- addressing,
encapsulation, routing, and forwarding.
In subsequent videos, we'll go into more detail on these three here.
Let's take a look at a cartoon diagram of a network.
A network consists of several different entities connected together.
These ones here shown as laptops are hosts.
These are typically what we think of as our devices that we're using,
like our computers or our cellphones.
The core of the network is made up of a connection
of what we call routers, shown by these symbols down here.
The reason that these symbols are used here
is because we have arrows coming in and out, indicating
that the router typically has several ports or input/output
places where it can make connections.
And the goal of the router is to take packets coming out on one port
and route them to another port so that the packet can
go to the correct location.
Now, in this part here, the core of the network
consists of the connections shown between the six
different routers over here.
And these ones from the router to the host
are often implemented using a link layer connection.
So you see, for example, here we have a shared connection
that might be handled using the link layer connections
that we talked about earlier.
Now, let's think about the general problem of taking
some kind of information, let's say a segment
coming from the transport layer, and delivering it from this host
here to another host at the other side of the screen.
What are the different functions that have to take place in order
for that to succeed?
Well, what we can see here is that, number 1,
the network consists of many, many different entities.
And in order for us to ensure delivery from this one to the other one,
we have to know where we are in the network and where we're going.
So that's the function of addressing.
What we want to do is we want to assign a unique name
or address to every single node in that network.
So here, for simplicity, I just denote the addresses using letters.

The next step that has to happen is what's called encapsulation.
Remember, the segment is a packet coming from the transport layer.
When it goes to the network layer, we add additional information
to that segment.
That process is called encapsulation.
And that creates what's called a datagram, the packet in the network
layer.
The key information that we have to add in the network layer
is information about the destination node.
There's a lot of other information contained in the datagram that's added,
but the key information is what is the destination of the packet.
So at every point in this chain, the packet knows where it's going,
and the routers know where the packet is going.
The next step is called routing.
Routing needs, in some sense, information about the global state of the network.
The idea is that we have a particular node that we might be interested in,
and what we want to know is, what is the best path
from this node A to every other node.
And so solving that problem is the problem of routing.
And the solution of that might look something like this.
So we see that for node A here, we have paths in green.
And if I follow the path from, let's say A to H
here-- using the green lines will get the best path.
So there are many possible paths,
but the best path according to this solution here would be from A, B, C, I
to H. Of course, it might also be possible to, let's say,
go A, B, J, I, H as well.
But in some sense, this path going through C rather than J
is the better path.
And so the job of the routing algorithm is to find that out.
The next step is forwarding.
Forwarding uses the result of the routing algorithm.
So it assumes, let's say for example, that it has
a solution to the routing algorithm.
So it knows the best path from node C to every other node.
Forwarding is a very local operation.
From this information from the routing algorithm,
what it tries to do is find what's called the forwarding table for node C.
What is the forwarding table for node C?
Well, if I look at and consider a packet sitting at node C,
there are four different links that it can go out.
So I denote those by L1 through L4.
The forwarding table tells us-- well, if I
know where I want to go, if I know my destination might
be any one of these nodes A through L, then which of the links
should I go out on?
For example, if I want to go to nodes A and B, I should go out on link L1.
And if I want to go, let's say, to nodes J, K, G, and L,
I would go out on link 4.
And so what the forwarding algorithm does
is simply take a packet-- remember, the datagram
contains information about its destination,
and given the packet and its destination,
it just sends it to one of those links using that forwarding table.
In summary then, in order to ensure delivery from source
to destination over a network, the network layer
performs these four different functions:
Addressing, where we put a name to every node in the network.
Encapsulation, where we take segments from the transport layer
and add additional information, in particular the destination
address, to create the datagram.
Routing, where we determine the best path from a source
to any other destination.
And finally, forwarding, where we look at locally
routing a packet at one particular node onto the correct link,
so that it can get to the next stage of its journey.
