
Let's review what we've covered in this part of the course, Part 3,
of a system view of communications from signals to packets.
Generally speaking, this course has been concerned
with the question of how we transmit information wirelessly between two
users who might be located Y distance apart.
For example, someone on the right hand side in Hong Kong
might be transmitting an email to somebody who will receive it
on his mobile phone in New York.
We've divided this problem up into three different parts, which we've covered
in different sections of this course.
In Part 1, we talked about the point to point link
from the phone to a base station.
In Part 2, we talked about how multiple users might share access
to the same base station using frequency division multiplexing.
And now in this part of the course, Part 3, what we've talked about
is the network part.
Inside here, you can see that once I've made the connection to the base
station on the right hand side, I need to route that email or text
message to the base station on the left hand side.
But the problem is, there's not a direct connection.
That connection has to take place over multiple halves.
And the route that that email message or SMS message might take is variable.

There are multiple pathways that I can get from the base station
on the right over to the base station on the left.
We've grounded our discussion of networks
with one particular example, which is the internet.
The most pervasive network we have in today's society.
The network, the internet, is a very complex entity.
It's actually a network of smaller networks.
What you can see here is different squares here,
indicating different networks.
For example, I might have a home network or a mobile network.
For example, I might want to use my mobile phone here
to access my email server at my work or college institution down here.
Each individual network consists of nodes and connections between nodes.
And we've talked about the nodes as being different types.
One type of node is a router, which is actually making up the way
that the network is interconnected.
And I have to take my data and pass it between different routers
in order to get it to a node which is called the host or the end system.
So the end systems might be the PC here or the web mail server
down here that I'm accessing in order to read my email.
Each of those nodes is interconnected by a communication link.
And there are many different physical media
that can support communication links.
They might be wired links.
For example fiber optic using light, copper, using electricity.
Or wireless links, for example, radio or satellite networks.
This internet you can see consists of many different parts
with a huge variety of different types of technologies
used in those different parts.
So we need some way of organizing our discussion here.
And we talked a little bit about the organization of the internet,
overall, as having some kind of rough hierarchy.
So we saw that in the center or the top level of this hierarchy,
there are these Tier 1 ISPs that are providing global or national coverage
over a wide region.
And there are several of these Tier 1 ISPs
that all interconnect with each other in order to provide us
with global interconnectivity.
And so this is not a strict hierarchy, where you have one person at the top
and then go down, but you have multiple people
at the top or multiple Tier 1 ISPs.
In the end, what I want to do as a user is connect to a user,
let's say on the other side over there.
In order to do that I have to go up and down the hierarchy.
So for example, if I'm in Hong Kong and I
want to connect to New York. I need to connect through my local ISP,
might be my university, into connection in Hong Kong,
and then go up to a more global connection.
And what you can see here is that in order
for me to communicate from let's say Hong Kong to New York,
I have to travel through a wide variety of different networks.
But there is this rough hierarchy where the tier ones are providing
larger coverage than the local ISPs, but it's not strict, if you can see here.
There's multiple reporting, or multiple lines,
where the Tier 2 might connect to multiple Tier 1 ISPs
or Tier 2 ISPs might connect in parallel with each other.
This rough hierarchy then allows us to build a huge network with global reach.
And the question is well, if I have this huge network,
how do I actually make the connection from this user
over here down to the user down there?
And it turns out that those connections are established using
a technology called packet switching.
So in packet switching what we do is we take the data that we want to send
and we divide it into smaller packets.
And then we send those packets over the network using a technique
called statistical multiplexing, where the users can then just
send their data whenever they have it, randomly,
and the network can handle that.
And we saw that there are many different potential problems
with packet switching.
For example, there might be collisions.
Two people might, or two users, might want
to access the same link at the same time.
And so links might be overloaded and things like that.
And so we discussed different ways of dealing with that.
But the big advantage of packet switching though is that through packet
switching what we can do is we can, number one make
better use of the network resources because we
can have better sharing of resources in comparison with other technologies,
like circuit switching.
And also it allows us for better scaling of the network
so that as we start to connect more and more devices to the internet, now
people are talking about the internet of things
where not only people but devices are being connected to the internet.
And so you can see that the network is going to grow
and we need a scale away to do that and packet switching
is what allows us to do that.

And so then in conclusion then, what we've seen
is we've seen a particular example of the network, the internet.
And we've seen that it has this rough hierarchical structure
and connections are established through a technique called packet switching.
