

In this final video, I'd like to try to tie everything together
by discussing how information is transferred over the network using
this layered architecture and using that understanding
to understand what we mean when we say the internet hourglass
and how that hourglass structure has allowed the internet to spread
and proliferate like it has.
So remember, we've divided our discussion of the internet protocol
stack into five different layers, and when information
is transferred over the network it has to pass
up and down through these layers.
For example, suppose we have an application sending
on this host over here that wants to communicate with a host over there
through the network.
Remember, what happens is that there's data at the application layer
and it has to pass down through each of these layers,
and as it passes down to each of these layers additional information
is added to those, to the message, in order
for the transport layer and the following layers to do its job.
Once it gets to the link layer it will go on into the network,
and it will go back up and to the network layer in the router.
And at this point here, the network layer
knows where the eventual destination of the information is,
so it will know which link to go out on the router here.
So we'll go out, let's say, on this next link over here,
and the same thing will happen at the next router.

And then finally once it reaches the host,
it will all the way up to the application layer.
And what you can see is that as it goes up through each of those layers,
the header information from that layer is stripped off
by the next higher layer.

What's critical to note in this layer communication structure
is that the end to end layers, the application and the transport layers
are implemented only in the hosts.
So the routers, which kind of make up the,
let's say, the connection fabric of the network, only
implement the network, link, and physical layer.
And so you can see that the layers here that are shared across all of them
is really the network layer.
In fact, there are many, many different possible link
technologies and physical communication media over which the links can operate.
And so this idea that we have many possible applications traveling
over many different possible physical links
but all sharing one network architecture is what
is known as the internet hourglass.
And so what we remember is that applications eventually
have to communicate with each other on different hosts.
They go down through the transport network
and down to the link layer protocol and then back up the stack over here.
But what you can see is that this kind of layered architecture
has this kind of hourglass kind of structure,
where there are many possible different applications running
on the top here and many different possible link
technologies, for example, wired technologies, wireless technologies,
and all sorts of new technologies that are being introduced.
However, this is all unified, right?
Despite the huge variety here and the huge variety
here, they're all unified by the fact that there are only a few transport protocols.

We discussed two of them, TCP and UDP.
But in fact the key is there's only one network protocol, the IP network protocol.

And so this is what allows this huge variety of different applications
to communicate with each other.
And so the fact that I only have one network protocol to deal with
makes things extremely scalable.
I can design my applications without having
to worry about different possible network protocols,
and I can design my link technologies without having to worry about the fact
that there are many different kinds of applications running over the thing.
And so this fact that I have a single network protocol,
the IP network protocol, is what has enabled the internet
to grow like it has, and which is what is allowing us to investigate
all sorts of new kinds of technologies, for example
like the internet of things, where now not only people but also devices
are connected into the internet.
In conclusion, then, I'd like to thank you for your attention
through all three parts of this class.
I hope you've learned something, and I hope
you've enjoyed taking this class as much as we've enjoyed making it for you.
