
Hello everyone.
Welcome to the lab demo for lab 3.
In Part 3 of this course, we have been focusing on the layered protocol
structure to provide service for a communication network.
We have known that the physical layer mainly
deals with the bits "On The Wire" issue, which has been solved in the first two
parts of this course.
In lab one, we talked about the link layer,
which is about the data transfer between neighbors.
And we introduced the ALOHA scheme or the ALOHA protocol,
to handle the multiple access issue.
In lab two, we talked about the network layer, whose major responsibility
is about the forwarding and routing of a packet from the source
to the destination.
And we introduced the Dijkstra’s algorithm to find the shortest path.
Today we will talk about the transport layer,
whose major responsibility is to build a logical communication
between processes.
So what do we mean by logical?
Consider the communication network here, where
we have two nodes who want to communicate with each other.
And the transport layer of the two nodes will
try to build a logical end-to-end transport.
So we can regard logical here as virtual.
So basically the two transport layers will
try to build a virtual link between the two nodes.
It does not care what kind of modulation schemes
is used in the physical layer.
It does not care what kind of Multiple Access Protocol
is used in the link layer.
It even does not care how we set up the path
between the sender and the receiver.
It only cares about how to provide a reliable end-to-end connection
between the two nodes.
So how can we provide a reliable end-to-end communication?
We need to guarantee several things.
For example, we should guarantee that the sender does not
send packets at a speed which is much higher than what
the receiver can handle.
And also, we should guarantee that the packet is successfully
received by the receiver.
So now let's see how we can achieve that purpose.
We will introduce the stop-and-wait protocol.
Consider the case where we have one sender, one receiver.
We will use the two yellow lines here to represent the timeline.
So at a given time instance, the sender will send a packet to the receiver.
The packet will go through the forward path and reaches the receiver.
Once the receiver receives the packet, it
will send an acknowledgement packet, or the ACK packet back.
The ACK packet will go through the backward path and reaches the sender.
So the sender now knows that the packet is successfully
received by the receiver, so it will send a new packet.
And this process will go on and on.
So it seems that the stop-and-wait protocol works well.
However, we do have some issues.
For example, it is possible that after the packet is sent from the sender,
it is lost on its way from the sender to the receiver.
And it's also possible that although the packet successfully
reaches the receiver, however, the ACK packet is lost in the backward path.
For both these two scenarios, the sender will stop and wait forever.
So that means the communication process will stop.
So how can we solve this issue?
For that purpose, we introduce another parameter, time-out.
So at any time instance when the sender sends a packet out,
it will also start a timer, if by the time
the timer stops the ACK packet does not come back,
the sender will make the assumption that the packet is lost.
So it will retransmit the same packet.
A similar thing happens for the second scenario.
So when the packet is sent out, the sender will start a timer.
If by the time the timer runs out, or the timer stops,
the ACK packet does not come back, the sender
will make the assumption that the packet is lost and retransmit the same packet.
However, there is a difference between the two scenarios.
Can you figure it out?
Yes, because the second timeout was triggered
by the loss of the ACK packet, not the loss of the original packet.
So the sender packet, in fact, reached the receiver.
So if the sender retransmits the same packet again,
there will be a duplicate packet at the receiver side.
And the receiver needs to know how to handle the duplicate packet.
So next question is how can we choose the timeout number?
For the first two scenarios, where the packet is lost on its way,
if we choose the timeout to be too large
then there will be unnecessary waiting for the lost packet.
But this does not mean that we should choose
a very small timeout. For example, if the timeout is smaller than the round trip
time which is the time for a packet to go from the sender to the receiver
and come back, what happens is, by the time the timer stops,
the ACK packet will not come back, and this will trigger a retransmission.
So if we make the timeout to be too small
there will be unnecessary retransmissions.
The selection of the timeout represents a trade-off
between unnecessary waiting for the lost packets
and unnecessary retransmissions.
